AI SDK 5 Tools
AI SDK by Vercel
Foundations

Overview
Providers and Models
Prompts
Tools
Streaming
Agents
Getting Started

Navigating the Library
Next.js App Router
Next.js Pages Router
Svelte
Vue.js (Nuxt)
Node.js
Expo
AI SDK Core

Overview
Generating Text
Generating Structured Data
Tool Calling
Prompt Engineering
Settings
Embeddings
Image Generation
Transcription
Speech
Language Model Middleware
Provider & Model Management
Error Handling
Testing
Telemetry
AI SDK UI

Overview
Chatbot
Chatbot Message Persistence
Chatbot Tool Usage
Generative User Interfaces
Completion
Object Generation
Streaming Custom Data
Error Handling
Transport
Reading UIMessage Streams
Message Metadata
Stream Protocols
AI SDK RSC

Overview
Streaming React Components
Managing Generative UI State
Saving and Restoring States
Multistep Interfaces
Streaming Values
Handling Loading State
Error Handling
Handling Authentication
Migrating from RSC to UI
Advanced

Reference

AI SDK Core

AI SDK UI

AI SDK RSC

Stream Helpers

AI SDK Errors

Migration Guides

Troubleshooting

Foundations
Tools
Tools

While large language models (LLMs) have incredible generation capabilities, they struggle with discrete tasks (e.g. mathematics) and interacting with the outside world (e.g. getting the weather).

Tools are actions that an LLM can invoke. The results of these actions can be reported back to the LLM to be considered in the next response.

For example, when you ask an LLM for the "weather in London", and there is a weather tool available, it could call a tool with London as the argument. The tool would then fetch the weather data and return it to the LLM. The LLM can then use this information in its response.

What is a tool?

A tool is an object that can be called by the model to perform a specific task. You can use tools with generateText and streamText by passing one or more tools to the tools parameter.

A tool consists of three properties:

description: An optional description of the tool that can influence when the tool is picked.
inputSchema: A Zod schema or a JSON schema that defines the input required for the tool to run. The schema is consumed by the LLM, and also used to validate the LLM tool calls.
execute: An optional async function that is called with the arguments from the tool call.
streamUI uses UI generator tools with a generate function that can return React components.

If the LLM decides to use a tool, it will generate a tool call. Tools with an execute function are run automatically when these calls are generated. The output of the tool calls are returned using tool result objects.

You can automatically pass tool results back to the LLM using multi-step calls with streamText and generateText.

Schemas

Schemas are used to define the parameters for tools and to validate the tool calls.

The AI SDK supports both raw JSON schemas (using the jsonSchema function) and Zod schemas (either directly or using the zodSchema function).

Zod is a popular TypeScript schema validation library. You can install it with:

pnpm
npm
yarn
bun
pnpm add zod
You can then specify a Zod schema, for example:


import z from 'zod';

const recipeSchema = z.object({
  recipe: z.object({
    name: z.string(),
    ingredients: z.array(
      z.object({
        name: z.string(),
        amount: z.string(),
      }),
    ),
    steps: z.array(z.string()),
  }),
});
You can also use schemas for structured output generation with generateObject and streamObject.

Toolkits

When you work with tools, you typically need a mix of application specific tools and general purpose tools. There are several providers that offer pre-built tools as toolkits that you can use out of the box:

agentic - A collection of 20+ tools. Most tools connect to access external APIs such as Exa or E2B.
browserbase - Browser tool that runs a headless browser
browserless - Browser automation service with AI integration - self hosted or cloud based
Smithery - Smithery provides an open marketplace of 6K+ MCPs, including Browserbase and Exa.
Stripe agent tools - Tools for interacting with Stripe.
StackOne ToolSet - Agentic integrations for hundreds of enterprise SaaS
Toolhouse - AI function-calling in 3 lines of code for over 25 different actions.
Agent Tools - A collection of tools for agents.
AI Tool Maker - A CLI utility to generate AI SDK tools from OpenAPI specs.
Composio - Composio provides 250+ tools like GitHub, Gmail, Salesforce and more.
Interlify - Convert APIs into tools so that AI can connect to your backend in minutes.
Freestyle - Tool for your AI to execute JavaScript or TypeScript with arbitrary node modules.
JigsawStack - JigsawStack provides over 30+ small custom fine tuned models available for specific uses.
Do you have open source tools or tool libraries that are compatible with the AI SDK? Please file a pull request to add them to this list.

Learn more

The AI SDK Core Tool Calling and Agents documentation has more information about tools and tool calling.

Previous
Prompts
Next
Streaming
On this page
Tools
What is a tool?
Schemas
Toolkits
Learn more
Elevate your AI applications with Vercel.
Trusted by OpenAI, Replicate, Suno, Pinecone, and more.
Vercel provides tools and infrastructure to deploy AI apps and features at scale.
Resources
Docs
Cookbook
Providers
Showcase
GitHub
Discussions
More
Playground
Contact Sales
About Vercel
Next.js + Vercel
Open Source Software
GitHub
X
Legal
Privacy Policy
© 2025 Vercel, Inc.



Foundations: Tools